Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the thyroid gland and its hormones. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the synthesis of the thyroid hormones.
The thyroid hormones are unusual in requiring iodine and in their elaborate mode of
synthesis and storage, and an understanding of this is the foundation of thyroid
physiology and of the action of antithyroid drugs, so it is worth describing.
The thyroid hormones are made in the thyroid gland,
in its follicles — spheres of cells surrounding a store of colloid.
Their synthesis requires iodine, taken up from the blood by the thyroid through an
active iodide trap that concentrates it.
The key protein is thyroglobulin, a large protein made by the follicular cells and
secreted into the colloid.
The synthesis proceeds: the iodide is oxidised and attached to the tyrosine
residues of the thyroglobulin — a step catalysed by the enzyme thyroid peroxidase —
forming iodinated tyrosines; these are then coupled together,
two of them combining to form the hormone.
This produces two hormones, stored within the thyroglobulin in the colloid:
thyroxine, with four iodine atoms, called T4;
and a smaller amount of tri-iodothyronine, with three, called T3.
When hormone is needed, the thyroglobulin is taken back into the cells and broken
down, releasing the T4 and T3 into the blood.
The antithyroid drugs act by blocking these steps — the iodide trapping or the
peroxidase enzyme.
So the thyroid hormones are synthesised in the thyroid follicles, requiring iodine,
which is trapped and concentrated; the iodide is attached, by thyroid peroxidase,
to the tyrosines of thyroglobulin and the iodinated tyrosines coupled,
forming thyroxine, or T4, and the smaller amount of tri-iodothyronine, or T3,
stored in the colloid and released by the breakdown of thyroglobulin — a synthesis
requiring iodine and the target of the antithyroid drugs.
Describe the transport and metabolism of the thyroid hormones,
including the conversion of T4 to T3.
The thyroid hormones, being lipophilic, are carried in the blood bound to proteins,
and the relationship between T4 and T3, and their conversion,
is important to understanding thyroid function, so it is worth describing.
The thyroid secretes mostly thyroxine, T4,
with a smaller amount of tri-iodothyronine, T3.
Both circulate in the blood largely bound to plasma proteins — chiefly
thyroxine-binding globulin — with only a small fraction free;
as with other protein-bound substances,
it is the free fraction that is active and available to the tissues,
the bound forming a reservoir.
An important point is the relationship between the two hormones:
although the thyroid secretes mostly T4,
it is T3 that is the more potent and the principal active hormone at the tissues;
much of the T3 that acts on the tissues is produced not by the thyroid but by the
conversion of T4 to T3 in the peripheral tissues,
by enzymes that remove an iodine atom — the deiodinases.
So T4 acts, in part, as a prohormone, converted to the active T3 in the tissues;
this conversion is regulated, and can be altered — reduced in illness and by some
drugs — and the T4 can alternatively be converted to an inactive form.
So the thyroid hormones circulate largely protein-bound,
chiefly to thyroxine-binding globulin, with only the small free fraction active;
the thyroid secreting mostly T4, which acts partly as a prohormone,
much of the active, more potent T3 being produced by the peripheral conversion of
T4 by deiodinase enzymes — a conversion that is regulated and altered in illness —
the transport and metabolism underlying thyroid hormone action.
Describe the control of thyroid hormone secretion.
The secretion of the thyroid hormones is controlled through the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, regulated by negative feedback,
and this is the classic example of an endocrine axis, so it is worth describing.
The control follows the three-tiered axis pattern.
The hypothalamus secretes thyrotropin-releasing hormone,
which stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete thyroid-stimulating hormone,
also called thyrotropin; this acts on the thyroid to stimulate all the steps of
thyroid hormone synthesis and release, and the growth of the gland.
The thyroid hormones, T4 and T3, then exert negative feedback,
acting chiefly on the pituitary, and also the hypothalamus,
to inhibit the secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone;
so the level of the thyroid hormones is held stable — if it rises,
the feedback reduces the thyroid-stimulating hormone and so the thyroid drive,
and if it falls, the drive increases.
This feedback relationship is the basis of the interpretation of thyroid function
tests: in primary thyroid failure, the low thyroid hormone releases the feedback,
so the thyroid-stimulating hormone rises; in thyroid overactivity,
the high thyroid hormone suppresses it, so the thyroid-stimulating hormone falls.
The thyroid also has some autoregulation by iodine.
So thyroid hormone secretion is controlled by the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid
axis: thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulating the pituitary thyroid-stimulating
hormone, which stimulates the thyroid;
the thyroid hormones feeding back to inhibit the pituitary and hypothalamus,
holding their level stable; the feedback being the basis of thyroid function
testing — the thyroid-stimulating hormone rising in thyroid failure and falling in
overactivity — the classic endocrine axis.
Describe the actions of the thyroid hormones.
The thyroid hormones have widespread effects on the body,
influencing the metabolism of almost all tissues and important in growth and
development, and knowing these actions is essential,
as both their excess and their deficiency cause characteristic syndromes.
The thyroid hormones act, like the steroids,
by entering cells and binding nuclear receptors,
altering gene expression and so the synthesis of proteins,
with effects on most tissues.
Their principal action is on metabolism:
they increase the basal metabolic rate — the overall rate of metabolism and oxygen
consumption and heat production of the body — by stimulating metabolic processes in
most tissues; so they are calorigenic,
increasing energy expenditure and heat production.
They have effects on the metabolism of carbohydrate, fat and protein,
generally increasing their turnover.
They have important effects on the cardiovascular system,
increasing the heart rate and the force of contraction and the cardiac output,
partly by increasing the sensitivity to the catecholamines.
They are essential for normal growth and, crucially,
for the development of the nervous system in the fetus and infant,
their deficiency in early life causing impaired growth and intellectual
development. They affect almost every system.
So the thyroid hormones, acting through nuclear receptors to alter gene expression,
increase the basal metabolic rate — being calorigenic, raising metabolism,
oxygen consumption and heat production — increase the turnover of the energy
substrates, stimulate the cardiovascular system, increasing heart rate,
force and output, and are essential for normal growth and for the development of
the nervous system; widespread actions whose excess and deficiency cause
characteristic syndromes.
Describe the features and anaesthetic implications of hyperthyroidism.
Hyperthyroidism, or thyrotoxicosis, the syndrome of excess thyroid hormone,
produces a characteristic clinical picture following from the actions of the
hormones, and it has important anaesthetic implications, so it is worth describing.
The features follow from the excess of the metabolic and other actions of the
thyroid hormones: an increased metabolic rate, with heat intolerance, sweating,
and weight loss despite a good appetite; cardiovascular effects,
with a tachycardia, palpitations, and a risk of arrhythmias,
particularly atrial fibrillation, and of high-output cardiac failure; nervousness,
tremor, agitation and restlessness; and other features,
with the specific eye signs in the common autoimmune form, Graves' disease.
The anaesthetic implications are significant.
The patient should, ideally, be rendered euthyroid before elective surgery,
with antithyroid treatment, because anaesthesia and surgery in the untreated
hyperthyroid patient risk the dangerous complication of a thyroid storm — an acute,
severe exacerbation, with extreme tachycardia, hyperthermia,
arrhythmias and cardiovascular collapse,
which can be precipitated by the stress of surgery and is life-threatening.
The cardiovascular effects, the arrhythmias,
and the sensitivity to catecholamines must be managed;
beta-blockade is valuable in controlling the cardiovascular features.
The airway may be affected by a goitre.
So hyperthyroidism causes an increased metabolic rate with heat intolerance and
weight loss, cardiovascular effects with tachycardia and arrhythmias,
and nervousness and tremor; its anaesthetic implications being to render the
patient euthyroid before elective surgery to avoid the dangerous thyroid storm,
to manage the cardiovascular effects with beta-blockade,
and to consider the airway in goitre — a syndrome of important anaesthetic
relevance.
Describe the features and anaesthetic implications of hypothyroidism.
Hypothyroidism, the syndrome of thyroid hormone deficiency,
produces a clinical picture that is, broadly, the opposite of hyperthyroidism,
and it too has anaesthetic implications, so it is worth describing alongside.
The features follow from the deficiency of the metabolic and other actions:
a reduced metabolic rate, with cold intolerance, weight gain,
and a general slowing — of the physical and mental functions, with lethargy,
slow thought and movement; cardiovascular effects,
with a bradycardia and reduced cardiac output; dry skin and hair,
and a characteristic puffy appearance from the deposition of material in the
tissues.
In its severe, untreated form it can progress to a dangerous state.
The anaesthetic implications arise from the slowing of the body's functions.
The hypothyroid patient is sensitive to the depressant effects of anaesthetic,
sedative and opioid drugs, with a risk of exaggerated and prolonged depression of
consciousness and breathing; the cardiovascular system is depressed,
with a reduced reserve and a tendency to hypotension;
there may be associated problems, such as a reduced metabolic rate affecting drug
handling, and temperature regulation, with a tendency to hypothermia.
Severe, untreated hypothyroidism carries a risk of a profound decompensation —
myxoedema coma. So elective surgery is best deferred until the patient is
adequately treated.
So hypothyroidism causes a reduced metabolic rate with cold intolerance and
slowing, bradycardia and reduced cardiac output, and the characteristic appearance;
its anaesthetic implications being the sensitivity to depressant drugs with
prolonged depression of consciousness and breathing,
the depressed cardiovascular reserve, and the risk of hypothermia and,
in severe cases, decompensation — so elective surgery awaits adequate treatment — a
syndrome of anaesthetic relevance, the counterpart of hyperthyroidism.
Describe calcitonin and the role of the thyroid in calcium balance.
Besides the thyroid hormones, the thyroid gland produces another hormone,
calcitonin, concerned not with metabolism but with calcium balance,
and it is worth describing briefly,
as the minor counterpart to the parathyroid hormone in calcium regulation.
Calcitonin is produced not by the follicular cells that make the thyroid hormones,
but by separate cells in the thyroid — the parafollicular, or C, cells.
It is a peptide hormone concerned with calcium balance, and its action is, broadly,
to lower the plasma calcium — opposite to the principal calcium-raising hormone,
parathyroid hormone.
It does this chiefly by acting on bone, inhibiting the bone-resorbing cells,
the osteoclasts, so reducing the release of calcium from bone into the blood;
it has some renal effects. Its secretion is stimulated by a rise in the plasma
calcium.
However, the physiological importance of calcitonin in humans is relatively minor:
it is not a major regulator of the plasma calcium,
which is controlled chiefly by parathyroid hormone and vitamin D;
and the consequences of its excess or deficiency on calcium balance are slight,
as shown by the lack of major calcium disturbance when the thyroid is removed or in
calcitonin-secreting tumours.
It does, however, have clinical uses as a drug and as a tumour marker.
So calcitonin is a peptide hormone produced by the parafollicular C cells of the
thyroid, which lowers the plasma calcium by inhibiting the bone-resorbing
osteoclasts, secreted in response to a rise in calcium;
but it is a relatively minor regulator of calcium in humans,
the major control resting with parathyroid hormone and vitamin D — the minor
counterpart in calcium regulation, with some clinical uses.
Pull it together: how does the thyroid gland regulate the body's metabolism?
I would draw the thyroid together around its role as the principal endocrine
regulator of the body's overall metabolic rate,
set by a feedback-controlled axis and acting on almost all tissues.
The thyroid produces its hormones — T4 and the more active T3 — by an elaborate,
iodine-requiring synthesis, storing them in colloid and releasing them into the
blood, where they circulate protein-bound,
the T4 being converted to the active T3 in the tissues.
Their secretion is controlled by the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis,
the thyroid-stimulating hormone driving the gland,
and the thyroid hormones feeding back to hold their level stable.
Acting through nuclear receptors on most tissues,
the hormones set the basal metabolic rate — the overall tempo of the body's
metabolism, oxygen consumption and heat production — and influence the
cardiovascular system and growth and development.
The importance of this regulation is shown by the syndromes of its disturbance:
hyperthyroidism, with its raised metabolic rate, tachycardia and weight loss,
and the risk of thyroid storm; and hypothyroidism, with its lowered metabolic rate,
slowing, and sensitivity to depressant drugs — both of anaesthetic significance.
So the thyroid regulates the body's metabolism:
producing the iodine-containing hormones T4 and T3 under the control of the
feedback-regulated pituitary-thyroid axis,
and acting through nuclear receptors on most tissues to set the basal metabolic
rate and influence the cardiovascular system and development;
its disturbances — hyper- and hypothyroidism — causing characteristic,
anaesthetically-important syndromes — the principal endocrine control of metabolic
rate.
Describe the actions of the thyroid hormones on the cardiovascular system in detail.
The thyroid hormones have marked effects on the cardiovascular system,
which are prominent in the disorders of thyroid function and of anaesthetic
relevance, so they are worth describing in detail.
The thyroid hormones increase the activity of the cardiovascular system,
partly by direct actions on the heart and vessels and partly by their general
increase in the metabolic rate, which increases the demand for blood flow.
Their effects include: an increase in the heart rate;
an increase in the force of cardiac contraction;
and so an increase in the cardiac output,
which is raised in proportion to the increased metabolic demand.
They also reduce the systemic vascular resistance,
dilating the vessels to supply the increased metabolic needs of the tissues.
Part of these effects is mediated by an increased sensitivity of the cardiovascular
system to the catecholamines — the thyroid hormones increasing the responsiveness
to sympathetic stimulation, which is why the cardiovascular features of thyroid
excess resemble sympathetic overactivity and respond to beta-blockade.
In thyroid excess, these effects are exaggerated — tachycardia,
a high cardiac output, a risk of arrhythmias, particularly atrial fibrillation,
and of high-output cardiac failure. In thyroid deficiency,
they are reduced — bradycardia and a low cardiac output.
So the thyroid hormones increase the heart rate,
the force of contraction and the cardiac output,
and reduce the systemic vascular resistance,
partly by increasing the sensitivity to catecholamines;
so thyroid excess causes tachycardia, a high output,
arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation and high-output failure — responsive to
beta-blockade — while thyroid deficiency causes bradycardia and a low output;
cardiovascular actions prominent in thyroid disorders and of anaesthetic relevance.
Describe thyroid storm and its management.
Thyroid storm, or thyrotoxic crisis, is a dangerous,
life-threatening exacerbation of hyperthyroidism,
of particular anaesthetic importance because it can be precipitated by surgery,
so its features and management are worth describing.
Thyroid storm is an acute, severe exacerbation of thyrotoxicosis,
in which the features of thyroid excess become extreme and life-threatening.
It is precipitated by a stress in a hyperthyroid patient — importantly,
the stress of surgery and anaesthesia,
particularly in a patient not rendered euthyroid beforehand, but also infection,
illness and other stresses.
Its features are an extreme exaggeration of thyrotoxicosis: a high fever,
hyperthermia; a marked tachycardia and arrhythmias,
with cardiovascular instability and the risk of high-output failure and collapse;
agitation, delirium, and a decline in consciousness; and gastrointestinal features.
It can be fatal. Its recognition under anaesthesia is complicated,
as some features may be masked or mimic other conditions,
such as malignant hyperthermia.
The management is urgent and supportive, with specific measures:
cooling and supporting the circulation and the organ functions;
blocking the effects of the thyroid hormones and the sympathetic overactivity with
beta-blockade; blocking the synthesis and release of further thyroid hormone with
antithyroid drugs and iodine; giving steroid; and treating any precipitant.
So thyroid storm is a life-threatening, extreme exacerbation of thyrotoxicosis,
precipitated by stress such as surgery in the inadequately-treated patient,
with hyperthermia, marked tachycardia and arrhythmias,
cardiovascular instability and altered consciousness;
managed urgently by cooling and support, beta-blockade,
antithyroid drugs and iodine to block hormone synthesis and release,
and steroid — a dangerous crisis of major anaesthetic importance,
best prevented by rendering the patient euthyroid before surgery.
Describe the airway and other anaesthetic considerations of a goitre.
An enlargement of the thyroid gland — a goitre — has important anaesthetic
implications, chiefly concerning the airway,
so these are worth describing as a practical application.
A goitre is an enlargement of the thyroid gland,
which lies in the neck around the trachea; it may occur with normal,
increased or decreased thyroid function. Its anaesthetic importance lies chiefly in
its anatomical effects on the airway and surrounding structures.
A large goitre can compress and deviate the trachea,
narrowing or displacing the airway,
which can make the management of the airway and intubation difficult,
and the narrowing may not be apparent until anaesthesia.
A goitre extending behind the sternum — a retrosternal goitre — can compress the
trachea and the great vessels within the chest, and is of particular concern.
The compression can cause symptoms of airway obstruction,
worse in certain positions.
There may be associated effects on the recurrent laryngeal nerves affecting the
vocal cords.
The assessment therefore includes evaluating the airway carefully,
with imaging to define any tracheal compression or deviation and retrosternal
extension, and planning the airway management accordingly.
The thyroid function must also be assessed and optimised.
So a goitre, by its position around the trachea,
has anaesthetic importance chiefly for the airway: it can compress,
narrow and deviate the trachea, making intubation difficult,
particularly a retrosternal goitre compressing the airway and great vessels in the
chest; so the airway is assessed carefully,
with imaging to define tracheal compression and retrosternal extension,
and the airway managed accordingly,
along with optimising the thyroid function — a practical anaesthetic application.
Describe the interpretation of thyroid function tests.
The assessment of thyroid function rests on the measurement of the thyroid hormones
and of thyroid-stimulating hormone,
interpreted through the feedback relationship of the axis,
and an understanding of this is worth having,
following from the control of the thyroid.
The principal tests are the measurement of the thyroid hormones — chiefly the free
thyroxine, and the free tri-iodothyronine — and of the thyroid-stimulating hormone
from the pituitary.
The interpretation rests on the feedback:
the thyroid-stimulating hormone is controlled by the negative feedback of the
thyroid hormones, so it moves in the opposite direction to the thyroid hormone
level, and it is a sensitive indicator. The patterns are as follows.
In a normal person, both are normal. In primary hyperthyroidism — thyroid
overactivity — the thyroid hormones are high,
and the thyroid-stimulating hormone is suppressed, low, by the feedback.
In primary hypothyroidism — thyroid underactivity — the thyroid hormones are low,
and the thyroid-stimulating hormone is high,
as the feedback is released and the pituitary drives the failing gland.
The thyroid-stimulating hormone is thus the key, sensitive test,
often abnormal before the hormones;
a raised thyroid-stimulating hormone with normal hormones indicates early or
subclinical hypothyroidism.
The less common secondary disorders, of the pituitary, give a different pattern,
the thyroid-stimulating hormone being inappropriately normal or low despite a low
hormone level.
So thyroid function is assessed by measuring the free thyroid hormones and the
thyroid-stimulating hormone, interpreted through the feedback:
in primary hyperthyroidism the hormones are high and the thyroid-stimulating
hormone suppressed; in primary hypothyroidism the hormones are low and the
thyroid-stimulating hormone raised;
the thyroid-stimulating hormone being the sensitive key test — an interpretation
following from the control of the thyroid axis.
Describe the antithyroid drugs and the treatment of hyperthyroidism.
The treatment of hyperthyroidism uses drugs that act on the synthesis and effects
of the thyroid hormones, and an understanding of these,
particularly the antithyroid drugs, follows from the synthesis of the hormones,
so it is worth describing.
The aim is to reduce the excess thyroid hormone and to control its effects,
by several approaches.
The antithyroid drugs reduce the production of thyroid hormone:
the thionamide drugs, such as carbimazole and propylthiouracil,
act by inhibiting the enzyme thyroid peroxidase,
and so the iodination and coupling steps of hormone synthesis,
reducing the production of new hormone;
they take some weeks to render the patient euthyroid,
as the stored hormone is used up.
They are used to control the disease and to prepare the patient for surgery.
Beta-blockade is used to control the cardiovascular and sympathetic features — the
tachycardia and tremor — rapidly, while the antithyroid drugs take effect,
by blocking the effects of the excess hormone and the catecholamine sensitivity.
Iodine, in high doses, transiently inhibits the release of thyroid hormone and
reduces the gland's vascularity, used in preparation for surgery.
The definitive treatments are radioactive iodine, which destroys thyroid tissue,
and surgery, removing the gland.
So hyperthyroidism is treated by reducing hormone production with the antithyroid
thionamide drugs — carbimazole and propylthiouracil — which inhibit thyroid
peroxidase and so hormone synthesis, taking weeks to act;
by controlling the cardiovascular and sympathetic features rapidly with
beta-blockade; by iodine to inhibit hormone release and reduce vascularity before
surgery; and definitively by radioactive iodine or surgery — treatments following
from the synthesis and effects of the thyroid hormones.
Describe myxoedema coma.
Myxoedema coma is the severe, decompensated,
life-threatening extreme of hypothyroidism, the counterpart of thyroid storm,
and although uncommon, it is worth describing,
as it is a dangerous endocrine emergency.
Myxoedema coma is the end stage of severe,
untreated or undertreated hypothyroidism,
in which the profound lack of thyroid hormone causes a decompensation of the body's
functions; it is often precipitated by a stress — infection, cold, surgery,
or sedative drugs — in a severely hypothyroid patient, frequently elderly.
Despite its name, coma is not always present.
Its features are an extreme of hypothyroidism: a depressed conscious level,
ranging to coma; a low body temperature, hypothermia,
as the metabolic heat production fails;
a depressed cardiovascular and respiratory function, with bradycardia, hypotension,
and hypoventilation causing carbon dioxide retention;
and often a low blood sodium and glucose.
It carries a high mortality.
Its management is urgent and supportive,
with the careful replacement of thyroid hormone: supporting the airway,
breathing and circulation; rewarming; correcting the metabolic disturbances;
treating the precipitant, such as infection; giving thyroid hormone replacement,
cautiously; and giving steroid, because of the associated risk of adrenal
insufficiency.
So myxoedema coma is the severe, decompensated extreme of hypothyroidism,
often precipitated by stress in a severely hypothyroid, often elderly patient,
with a depressed conscious level, hypothermia,
and depressed cardiovascular and respiratory function with hyponatraemia and
hypoglycaemia; managed urgently by support, rewarming,
correction of the disturbances, treatment of the precipitant,
cautious thyroid hormone replacement,
and steroid — a dangerous endocrine emergency, the counterpart of thyroid storm.
Describe the role of the thyroid hormones in growth and development.
Besides their metabolic actions, the thyroid hormones are essential for normal
growth and, crucially, for the development of the nervous system,
and this role is worth describing, as its failure in early life has serious and
irreversible consequences.
The thyroid hormones are necessary for normal growth and development,
in addition to their metabolic effects. They are required for normal physical
growth, acting with growth hormone;
a deficiency in childhood impairs growth and delays development.
Most critically, they are essential for the normal development of the nervous
system, particularly in fetal and early postnatal life,
when the brain is developing rapidly:
the thyroid hormones are needed for the normal growth,
differentiation and maturation of the developing brain.
Consequently, a deficiency of thyroid hormone in the fetus and infant — from
congenital absence or underactivity of the thyroid,
or from maternal or dietary iodine deficiency — causes a severe impairment of brain
development, with intellectual disability, as well as impaired growth:
the condition formerly called cretinism.
Crucially, this brain damage is largely irreversible if not treated very early,
because it occurs during the critical period of brain development — which is the
rationale for the screening of newborns for hypothyroidism,
so that treatment can be started in time to prevent it.
So the thyroid hormones are essential for normal growth, and, critically,
for the development of the nervous system in fetal and early life,
when the brain develops rapidly; their deficiency in early life causing impaired
growth and a severe, largely irreversible impairment of brain development with
intellectual disability — the rationale for newborn screening,
allowing early treatment to prevent the irreversible damage — a developmental role
of great importance.
Describe the metabolic actions of the thyroid hormones in more detail.
The central action of the thyroid hormones is on metabolism,
raising the basal metabolic rate, and a fuller account of these metabolic effects
is worth giving, as they underlie the syndromes of thyroid disorder.
The thyroid hormones increase the overall metabolic rate of the body — the rate at
which it consumes oxygen, produces heat,
and turns over energy — by stimulating metabolic processes in most tissues:
increasing the activity of many metabolic enzymes,
the consumption of oxygen and the production of heat, so that they are calorigenic,
raising heat production and increasing the appetite to fuel the raised metabolism.
They affect the metabolism of each fuel: increasing the turnover of carbohydrate,
of fat — both its synthesis and, more, its breakdown,
tending to reduce the fat stores — and of protein,
at normal levels promoting protein synthesis and growth,
but in excess promoting protein breakdown and wasting.
So a normal level maintains the basal metabolic rate;
an excess causes an increased metabolism with heat intolerance,
weight loss despite a good appetite, and tissue wasting;
and a deficiency the reverse, with cold intolerance and weight gain.
So the thyroid hormones raise the basal metabolic rate by stimulating metabolic
processes in most tissues — increasing oxygen consumption and heat production,
being calorigenic — and increase the turnover of carbohydrate, fat and protein;
an excess causing increased metabolism with heat intolerance,
weight loss and wasting, and a deficiency the reverse — the metabolic actions
underlying the thyroid syndromes.
Describe the uptake and handling of iodine by the thyroid.
The thyroid hormones uniquely require iodine,
and the thyroid has special mechanisms to acquire and concentrate it,
the understanding of which is relevant to thyroid function, to its disorders,
and to the use of iodine and radioiodine, so it is worth describing.
Iodine is an essential component of the thyroid hormones,
and must be obtained from the diet, where its supply may be limited.
The thyroid has a powerful mechanism to acquire it:
an active iodide trap in the follicular cells,
which transports iodide from the blood into the thyroid against a gradient,
concentrating it many-fold; the trapped iodide is then used in hormone synthesis.
This iodine handling has several implications.
A deficiency of dietary iodine limits hormone synthesis and causes thyroid
enlargement — goitre — and, if severe, hypothyroidism,
a major problem in iodine-deficient regions, addressed by iodising salt.
The avidity of the thyroid for iodide is exploited therapeutically:
radioactive iodine, taken up and concentrated by the thyroid,
is used to image the gland and, in larger doses, to destroy thyroid tissue.
High doses of iodine transiently inhibit the gland.
So the thyroid acquires the iodine essential for its hormones by an active iodide
trap that concentrates iodide from the blood many-fold;
a dietary deficiency limiting synthesis and causing goitre and hypothyroidism,
addressed by iodising salt; and the thyroid's avidity for iodide being exploited by
radioactive iodine, taken up to image or destroy the gland — iodine handling
relevant to thyroid function, its disorders and its treatment.
Describe the mechanism of action of the thyroid hormones at the cellular level.
The thyroid hormones, although derived from an amino acid,
act like the steroid hormones through intracellular receptors altering gene
expression, and an understanding of this explains the nature and the slow
time-course of their effects, so it is worth describing.
The thyroid hormones are lipophilic, and so, unlike most amine hormones,
can cross the cell membrane and act on intracellular receptors,
in the manner of the steroids.
The active hormone — chiefly T3, into which much of the T4 is converted within the
tissues — enters the cell and binds a receptor in the nucleus;
the hormone-receptor complex binds regulatory regions of the DNA and alters the
transcription of specific genes, so changing the synthesis of particular proteins,
including many metabolic enzymes through which the hormone acts.
Because the effects depend on changes in gene expression and protein synthesis,
they are slow in onset, taking hours to days,
and prolonged — in keeping with the hormone's role in setting the sustained
metabolic rate rather than producing rapid responses.
The peripheral conversion of T4 to the more active T3,
and the regulation of the receptors, modulate the response.
So the thyroid hormones, being lipophilic,
cross the membrane and act like steroids on nuclear receptors:
the active T3 binding a nuclear receptor,
the complex altering the transcription of specific genes and so protein synthesis,
including metabolic enzymes; the dependence on gene expression making the effects
slow in onset and prolonged, in keeping with their role in setting the sustained
metabolic rate — a mechanism explaining the nature of their effects.
Describe the changes in thyroid function in non-thyroidal illness.
The thyroid function tests are altered in severe non-thyroidal illness,
in a pattern that can be mistaken for thyroid disease,
and an awareness of this — the sick euthyroid, or non-thyroidal illness,
syndrome — is worth having, as it is common in the critically ill.
In severe illness of any kind, the thyroid function tests are commonly altered,
even without primary thyroid disease.
The characteristic change is a reduction in the active T3:
the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3 is reduced,
because the deiodinase activity is altered in illness, so the T3 falls,
while more T4 is converted to an inactive form;
the thyroid-stimulating hormone is usually normal or low, and the T4 variable.
This is thought to represent an adaptation — a reduction in metabolic rate to
conserve energy during illness — rather than true thyroid disease.
Its importance is that it can be mistaken for thyroid disease,
and that the tests are therefore hard to interpret in the acutely ill,
so testing is generally avoided in acute illness unless thyroid disease is
genuinely suspected; the changes usually resolve with recovery.
So in severe non-thyroidal illness the thyroid tests are altered — chiefly a fall
in the active T3 from reduced peripheral conversion of T4,
with a normal or low thyroid-stimulating hormone — the sick euthyroid syndrome,
an adaptive reduction of metabolism rather than thyroid disease;
important because it mimics thyroid disease and makes the tests hard to interpret
in the acutely ill, usually resolving with recovery.
Describe the assessment and preparation of the hyperthyroid patient for surgery.
The preparation of the hyperthyroid patient for surgery is of great importance,
because operating on the inadequately-treated patient risks the dangerous thyroid
storm, and the principles follow from the treatment of hyperthyroidism,
so they are worth drawing together.
The central principle is that the patient should, wherever possible,
be rendered euthyroid before elective surgery,
to minimise the risk of thyroid storm and to control the cardiovascular effects;
this requires time and planning.
The assessment establishes the thyroid status,
by the clinical features and the thyroid function tests,
and evaluates the cardiovascular effects — the heart rate and rhythm,
looking for atrial fibrillation and failure — and, if there is a goitre, the airway.
The preparation, for elective surgery,
uses the antithyroid drugs to render the patient euthyroid over some weeks;
beta-blockade to control the cardiovascular and sympathetic features; and,
before thyroid surgery, sometimes iodine to reduce the gland's vascularity.
For urgent surgery that cannot await full treatment,
the patient is prepared as rapidly as possible — with beta-blockade,
antithyroid drugs and other measures — and managed with great care,
alert for thyroid storm.
So the hyperthyroid patient is, wherever possible,
rendered euthyroid before elective surgery to avoid thyroid storm:
assessed for the thyroid status, cardiovascular effects and, in goitre, the airway;
and prepared with antithyroid drugs over weeks,
beta-blockade for the cardiovascular features, and iodine before thyroid surgery;
with rapid preparation and great care if surgery is urgent — principles of major
anaesthetic importance.
Describe the consequences of total thyroidectomy and the principles of thyroid
replacement.
The removal of the thyroid gland, and the replacement of its hormones,
illustrate the consequences of thyroid hormone deficiency and the principles of
replacement, so they are worth describing as a practical application.
After a total thyroidectomy — for thyroid cancer, large goitres,
or overactivity — the patient can no longer produce thyroid hormones,
and develops hypothyroidism unless they are replaced; they also lose calcitonin,
of little consequence, and are at risk of the parathyroid damage already discussed,
causing hypocalcaemia.
The thyroid hormones must therefore be replaced, for life.
The replacement is given as thyroxine — T4 — by mouth,
which is well absorbed and converted in the tissues to the active T3,
as the gland's own T4 would be; T4 is used rather than T3 because its long
half-life gives a stable level on once-daily dosing.
The dose is adjusted to restore the normal thyroid state,
guided by the clinical state and, importantly,
the thyroid-stimulating hormone — a raised level indicating under-replacement,
and a suppressed level over-replacement — so the patient is monitored and the dose
titrated to a normal thyroid-stimulating hormone.
So total thyroidectomy abolishes thyroid hormone production,
causing hypothyroidism unless replaced,
with the additional risk of parathyroid damage and hypocalcaemia;
the hormone is replaced for life as oral thyroxine,
whose long half-life gives a stable level and which is converted to active T3 in
the tissues, the dose titrated to restore a normal state and guided by the
thyroid-stimulating hormone — a practical illustration of thyroid deficiency and
replacement.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Thyroid hormones are synthesised in the thyroid follicles,
requiring iodine (trapped and concentrated):
iodide is attached by thyroid peroxidase to the tyrosines of thyroglobulin and the
iodinated tyrosines coupled, forming thyroxine (T4,
four iodines) and the smaller amount of tri-iodothyronine (T3, three),
stored in colloid and released by thyroglobulin breakdown.
Antithyroid drugs block the iodide trap or peroxidase.
Second, Thyroid hormones circulate largely protein-bound (chiefly thyroxine-binding
globulin); only the free fraction is active.
The thyroid secretes mostly T4, which acts partly as a prohormone — much of the
more potent, active T3 is produced by peripheral conversion of T4 by deiodinases
(regulated; reduced in illness). 3.
Control via the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis: TRH → pituitary TSH → thyroid;
the thyroid hormones feed back to inhibit the pituitary/hypothalamus,
holding their level stable — the basis of thyroid function tests (TSH rises in
primary thyroid failure, falls in overactivity).
Third, Thyroid hormones act through nuclear receptors on most tissues:
they raise the basal metabolic rate (calorigenic — ↑ metabolism, O2 consumption,
heat), increase substrate turnover, stimulate the cardiovascular system (↑ rate,
force, output; ↑ catecholamine sensitivity),
and are essential for growth and nervous-system development.
Calcitonin (parafollicular C cells) lowers plasma calcium by inhibiting osteoclasts
but is a minor regulator in humans. Fourth, Hyperthyroidism:
↑ metabolic rate (heat intolerance, weight loss), tachycardia/arrhythmias (esp.
AF), tremor/agitation — render euthyroid before elective surgery to avoid thyroid
storm; beta-blockade controls cardiovascular features;
consider the airway in goitre.
Hypothyroidism: ↓ metabolic rate (cold intolerance, slowing),
bradycardia — sensitivity to depressant/opioid drugs (prolonged depression),
depressed cardiovascular reserve, hypothermia risk;
defer elective surgery until treated.
Thank you. That concludes the station.